Prime Minister’s opening remarks at the G20 Summit
September 08, 2023

Your Highnesses,
Excellencies,
Namaskar!

Before starting the formal proceedings, on behalf of all of us, I would like to express my heartfelt condolences to the people affected by the earthquake that occurred in Morocco a moment ago. We pray that all the injured people get well soon. The entire world community is with Morocco in this difficult time, and we are ready to provide them all possible assistance.

Your Highnesses,
Excellencies,

As the President of the G-20, India extends a warm welcome to all of you.

At the place where we are gathered today, just a few kilometers away from here, stands a pillar that is nearly two and a half thousand years old. Inscribed on this pillar in the Prakrit language are the words:

'हेवम लोकसा हितमुखे ति,
अथ इयम नातिसु हेवम'

Meaning,

‘The welfare and happiness of humanity should always be ensured.’
Two and a half thousand years ago, the land of India gave this message to the entire world.

Let us begin this G-20 Summit by remembering this message.

The 21st century is a time that has the potential to give a new direction to the entire world. It's a time when years old challenges demand new solutions from us. Therefore, we must move forward by fulfilling all our responsibilities with a Human Centric approach.

Friends,

After Covid-19, a huge crisis of lack of trust has come in the world. Conflict has deepened this trust deficit.

Just as we can overcome COVID, we can also overcome this crisis of mutual trust.

Today, as the President of the G-20, India invites the entire world to come together and, first and foremost, transform this Global Trust Deficit into global trust and confidence.

This is a time for all of us to walk together, and the mantra of 'Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas, and Sabka Prayas' can become a guiding light for all of us.

Whether its a turbulent global economy,
or the North-South divide,
or the distance between East and West,
Management of Food, Fuel, and Fertilizer,
Or dealing with Terrorism and Cybersecurity,
Or ensuring Health, Energy, and Water Security,

We must move towards concrete solutions for these challenges, not just for the present but also for future generations,

Friends,

India's G-20 presidency has become a symbol of inclusion, both within the country and beyond, representing the spirit of 'Sabka Saath'.

It has become a 'People's G-20’. Millions of Indians have engaged with it.

Over 200 meetings have been held in more than 60 cities across the country.

It was in the spirit of 'Sabka Saath' that India proposed permanent membership for the African Union in the G-20. I believe that we all agree on this proposal.

With your consent, before we proceed with further proceedings, I invite the Chairperson of the African Union to take their place as a permanent member of the G-20.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Prime Minister’s remarks at the G20 Summit Session 1
September 09, 2023

Friends,

India is a land of diversity of faith, spirituality and traditions. Many major religions of the world were born here, and every religion of the world has found respect here. 
As the 'Mother of Democracy,' our belief in dialogue and democratic principles has been unwavering since time immemorial. Our global conduct is rooted in the fundamental principle of 'Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam,' which means ‘world is one family.'
This very notion of considering the world as one family, also connects every Indian with the sense of responsibility of 'One Earth'. It is with this spirit of 'One Earth' that India has initiated the 'Lifestyle for Environment Mission.' With India's initiative and your support, the entire world is celebrating the 'International Year of Millets' this year, in alignment with the principles of Climate Security. In line with this spirit, India launched the 'Green Grids Initiative - One Sun, One World, One Grid' , at COP-26. 
Today, India stands among the countries where a large-scale solar revolution is underway. Millions of Indian farmers have embraced natural farming. This is a big campaign to protect human health as well as the health of the soil and the Earth. We have also launched the 'National Green Hydrogen Mission' in India to boost green hydrogen production. During India's G-20 presidency, we have also taken significant steps toward creating a Global Hydrogen Ecosystem. 
Friends, 
Keeping in mind the challenge of climate change, energy transition is a significant need of the 21st century world. Trillions of dollars are required for an inclusive energy transition. Naturally, developed countries play a very crucial role in this. 
Along with India, all the countries of the Global South are pleased that developed countries have taken a positive initiative this year, in 2023. Developed countries have expressed their willingness to fulfill their commitment of 100 billion dollars for climate finance for the first time. 
By adopting the 'Green Development Pact,' G-20 has also reaffirmed its commitments to sustainable and green growth. 
Friends, 
With the spirit of collective effort, today, India has some suggestions on this G-20 platform. 
Today, the need of the hour is that all countries should work together in the field of fuel blending. Our proposal is to take an initiative at a global-level to take ethanol blending in petrol up to 20 percent." 
Or alternatively, we could work on developing another blending mix for the greater global good, one that ensures a stable energy supply while also contributing to climate security. 
In this context, today, we are launching the Global Biofuel Alliance. India invites all of you to join this initiative. 
Friends, 
Keeping the environment in mind, discussions on Carbon Credit have been ongoing for decades. Carbon Credit emphasizes what should not be done; it has a negative perspective. 
As a result, what positive steps should be taken, often do not receive adequate attention. There is a lack of encouragement for positive initiatives. 
Green Credit shows us the way forward. To promote this positive thinking, I propose that G-20 countries start working on a 'Green Credit Initiative.'
Friends, 
You are all familiar with the success of India's Moon Mission, Chandrayaan. The data obtained from it will be beneficial for all of humanity. With the same spirit, India is proposing the launch of the 'G20 Satellite Mission for Environment and Climate Observation.' 
The climate and weather data obtained from this will be shared with all the countries, especially the countries of the Global South. India invites all G-20 countries to join this initiative. 
Friends, 
Once again, a very warm welcome and congratulations to all of you. 
Now, I am eager to hear your thoughts. 


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------



Prime Minister’s remarks at the G20 Summit Session 2
September 09, 2023

Friends,

We have just received a good news. Due to the hard work of our teams and the support of all of you, the New Delhi G20 Leaders’ Summit Declaration has been agreed on. 

I propose that we also adopt this Leaders' declaration. I declare to adopt this declaration. 

On this occasion, I would like to congratulate our Minister, Sherpa and all the officials who have put in immense effort to make this worthwhile, and therefore, they all deserve to be congratulated. 

Your Highness,

Excellencies, 

In our ancient Vedas, which were composed thousands of years ago, it is said - "एको अहम् बहुस्याम्!" This means, "I am one; let me become many." 

We need to move from "I" to "We" for creation, innovation, and viable solutions. 

"I" to "We", 

that means thinking of the whole from the self, 

the well-being of "us" instead of just "me," 

We have to emphasize on this. 

We must connect every class, every country, every society, and every region of the world. 

And this is the essence of the One Family concept.

Just like every family has its own support system, we need to build a global support system together. 

We should develop the mindset that someone else's happiness should make us happy, and someone else's sorrow should make us equally sad. 

When we think as One Family, we also keep in mind how to empower each member. 

It is in this spirit that India wants to share its every experience with its huge global family. 

In India, we have adopted technology as a bridge to make development inclusive and sustainable. 

India has developed a new model of inclusion, transparency, and targeted interventions with the JAM Trinity of bank accounts, Aadhar identity and mobile phones. 

The World Bank has also acknowledged that the JAM Trinity has achieved a financial inclusion rate in just 6 years which would have taken 47 years to achieve. 

Using this model, India has transferred 360 billion dollars directly to the bank accounts of those in need over the past decade. 

This has prevented leakage of approximately 33 billion dollars, which is nearly 1.25% of the GDP. 

Certainly, this model can be very beneficial for the global family, especially for the Global South. 

Friends, 

India's youth, our young talent, is also for the global good, in the form of One Family. 

In the times to come, having a large skilled young talent pool is crucial to sustain global growth. 

Therefore, we should move towards "Global Skill Mapping." 

This is also a priority for the Global South. 

Friends, 

While talking about One Family, we must also keep in mind the challenges that lie ahead for our Global Family. 

We have seen that when a huge global challenge came in the form of Covid, the global supply chains built over decades were completely exposed. 

Under the concept of One Family, today we must build a global supply chain that promotes trust and transparency. 

This is our collective responsibility. 

We cannot view countries and humanity solely as markets. 

We need a sensitive and long-term approach. 

We must pay special attention to the capacity building of the developing countries. 

Therefore, India's proposal for a mapping framework will help strengthen the existing supply chain. 

To make the global supply chain inclusive, we must also acknowledge the active role of small businesses. 

It is essential that they have access to markets and information, and that trade costs are reduced for them. 

Friends, 

Continuing with the One Family mantra, we must also address the debt crisis faced by developing countries with sensitivity. 

We need to establish a system that allows countries in crisis to overcome it and ensures that such crises never happen again. 

I'm pleased that there is an agreement under the "Action Plan to Accelerate Sustainable Development Goals" to increase financing for this purpose. 

I express my gratitude to all of you for this. 

Friends, 

The One Family approach is equally essential for a "Holistic health and Wellness" system. 

The WHO Global Centre for Traditional Medicine being established in India will strengthen the promotion of wellness worldwide. 

I hope that we will soon make efforts to establish a global repository for traditional medicine. 

Friends, 

In every society around the world, mothers are the driving force of the family. 

Today, in India, we see women's leadership in every sector. 

Approximately 45% of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) graduates in India are women. 

Today, many critical missions in India's space program are being handled by our female scientists. 

Today, around 90 million women in Indian villages are taking forward small businesses by joining the Self Help Groups campaign. 

I believe that women-led development will be a significant driver of change in the 21st century. 

Friends, 

In this One Family session, I would like to present three suggestions to you. 

First, we can urge the top sports leagues in the world to invest 5% of their earnings into sports infrastructure for women in countries of the Global South. 

This could serve as a new model of public-private partnership at the global level. 

Second, similar to how all countries issue different categories of visas, we can establish a "G20 Talent Visa" as a special category. 

This type of visa could be highly beneficial for our top science and technology talent to explore global opportunities. Their talent and efforts can contribute significantly to our economies. 

Third, we can consider the establishment of Global Bio-banks under the supervision of the WHO. 

These bio-banks could focus specifically on diseases like heart diseases, sickle cell anemia, endocrine disorders and breast cancer. 

Setting up such Global Bio-banks in India would bring us great satisfaction. 

Friends, 

Now, I would like to hear from all of you.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Prime Minister’s remarks at the G20 Summit Session 3
Your Highnesses,
Excellencies,

Yesterday, we had extensive discussions in the One Earth and One Family sessions. I am satisfied that today the G-20 has become a platform for optimistic efforts regarding the vision of One Earth, One Family, One Future.

We are currently discussing a future where we transcend the concept of Global Village and witness the Global Family becoming a reality. It's a future where not only the interests of countries are intertwined, but also where hearts are interconnected.

Friends,

I have continuously drawn your attention to Human Centric Vision instead of GDP Centric Approach. Today many countries like India have so much that we are sharing with the whole world.

India has talked about sharing the data of Chandrayaan Mission with everyone in the interest of humanity. This is also a proof of our commitment towards Human Centric Growth.

India has harnessed technology to foster inclusive development and facilitate last-mile delivery. Even in our most remote villages, the small-scale traders are using digital payments.

I am happy that under India's chairmanship a strong framework for Digital Public Infrastructure has been agreed upon. Similarly, "G20 Principles on Harnessing Data for Development” have also been accepted.

It has also been decided to launch "Data for Development Capacity Building Initiative” for the development of Global South. Formation of Startup 20 engagement group during the Presidency of India is also a big step.

Friends,

Today, we are witnessing an unprecedented scale and speed in new-generation technologies. Artificial Intelligence is such example in front of us. In 2019, the we adopted the "Principles on AI”. Today, we need to take one step further.

I propose that we establish a framework for Responsible Human-Centric AI governance. India will also give its suggestions in this regard. It will be our endeavor that all countries get the benefits of AI in areas like Socio-Economic Development, Global Workforce and R&D.

Friends,

Today, our world is also facing some other burning problems, which are affecting both the present and future of all our countries. We are familiar with the challenges of cyber security and crypto-currency. The field of crypto-currency, has emerged as a new topic for everyone i.e social order, monetary and financial stability. Therefore, we have to develop global standards to regulate crypto-currencies. We have the Basel standards on bank regulation in front of us as a model.

It is imperative that we take concrete steps in this direction as soon as possible. Likewise, global cooperation and a framework for cybersecurity are essential. Terrorism is exploiting new channels and new funding methods from the cyber world, making it a critical issue for the security and prosperity of every nation.

Only when we take care of the security of every country and the sensitivity of every country, the feeling of One Future will be strengthened.

Friends,

To take the world towards a better future, it is necessary that global systems are in accordance with the realities of the present. Today the "United Nations Security Council" is also an example of this. When the UN was established, the world at that time was completely different from today. At that time there were 51 founding members in the UN. Today the number of countries included in the UN is around 200.

Despite this, the permanent members in UNSC are still the same. From then till today the world has changed a lot in every respect. Be it transport, communication, health, education, every sector has been transformed. These new realities should be reflected in our new global structure.

It is a law of nature that individuals and organizations that fail to adapt to changing times inevitably lose their relevance. We must think with an open mind as to what is the reason that many regional forums have come into existence in the past years, and they are also proving to be effective.

Friends,

Today, it is necessary for every global organization to reform to increase its relevance. With this in mind, yesterday we have taken the historic initiative of making the African Union a permanent member of the G-20. Similarly, we will also have to expand the mandate of Multilateral Development Banks. Our decisions in this direction should be immediate and also effective.

Friends,

In a world marked by rapid change, we require not only transformation but also sustainability and stability. Come! Let us pledge that we will take our resolutions of Green Development Pact, Action Plan on SDGs, High level Principles on Anti-corruption, Digital Public Infrastructure, and MDB Reforms to fruition.

Your Highnesses,
Excellencies,

Now I would like to hear your thoughts.



-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Prime Minister’s remarks at the closing ceremony of G20 summit
Friends,

We have complete faith in the Troika spirit.

We pledge our unwavering support to Brazil and firmly believe that, during their leadership, the G-20 will further advance our common objectives.

I congratulate President of Brazil and my friend, Lula da Silva.

With that, I pass on the presidency gavel to him.

I invite President Lula to share his thoughts on this occasion.

(President Lula’s remarks)

Your Highnesses,
Excellencies,

As you are aware, India holds the G-20 Presidency till November. There are still two and a half months left.

In these two days, all of you have put forth many things, given suggestions, made many proposals.

It is our responsibility to once again look at the suggestions that have come forward, to see how thier progress can be accelerated.

I propose that we hold another virtual session of the G-20 Summit at the end of November.

In that session we can review the topics decided during this summit.

Our team will share the details of all these with you all.

I hope you all will join in this.

Your Highnesses,
Excellencies,

With these words, I officially conclude this G-20 Summit.

May the path toward One Earth, One Family, One Future be pleasant.

स्वस्ति अस्तु विश्वस्य!

Which means there let there be hope and peace in the entire world.

With the well-wishes of 140 crore Indians, I express our sincere gratitude to all of you!